---
title: Rails Database Queries
date: 2024-04-21 15:33:55 +0000
categories: [Ruby on Rails, Layered Design for Ruby on Rails Applications]
tags: [ruby, rails, web, layered design, database, queries, arel, active record,]
---

In web development, managing database interactions can slow down app performance and make maintenance tough.

But what if you could make this easier and turn complex `SQL` language into simple, easy-to-manage code?

`Ruby on Rails` and its tool, `Active Record`, do just that.

This article shows how `Rails` makes database queries cleaner and speeds up development.

Get ready to see how `Rails` can change your applications with smart, efficient ways to handle databases that are also easy to use.

## Streamlining Database Queries in Rails with Active Record

`Active Record` lets you query databases without `SQL`. You use a method called method chaining, which reads like plain English. For example, to load published posts in order by date, you write:

```ruby
Post.where(draft: false).order(created_at: :desc)
```

This gives you a simple `SQL` command to get posts from newest to oldest.

In `Rails`, you can also handle complex queries with `Active Record`. For instance, to find users with bookmarked posts from last week

```ruby
User.with(
 bookmarked_posts: Post.where(created_at: Date.current.prev_week.all_week)
 .where.associated(:bookmarks).select(:user_id).distinct
).joins(:bookmarked_posts)
```

Placing these queries in controllers or jobs affects how easy it is to maintain the code. Changes in business logic or updates need updating the queries:

```ruby
Post.where(deleted_at: nil).where(draft: false).order(created_at: :desc)
```

Testing these queries requires more complex tests, slowing down productivity.

To make code easier to keep up, `Rails` suggests putting complex searches into model class methods or named scopes. This helps avoid repeating code and makes it simpler to handle.

```ruby
class Post < ApplicationRecord
 scope :ordered, -> { order(created_at: :desc) }
 scope :published, -> { where(draft: false) }
 scope :kept, -> { where(deleted_at: nil) }
 scope :previous_week, -> {
  where(created_at: Date.current.prev_week.all_week)
 }
end

Post.kept.published.ordered
```

This makes the model a central place for queries but increases the need for updates due to its many roles.

## Extracting Query Logic into Separate Objects

Moving the `User.with_bookmarked_posts` method into its own query object, like a `UserWithBookmarkedPostsQuery` class, is a smart idea for a couple of reasons:

1. **Keeps Models Simple**: By taking this method out of the model, you help the model focus on what it's mainly about—its basic attributes and actions. This follows a rule in coding that says each piece of code should only have one main job.
2. **Fits Specific Needs**: This method is only needed for specific parts of your app, not everywhere. It's a good idea to separate it from your main model, which should keep more general code. This keeps your overall code clean and easier to handle.

By creating a new `UserWithBookmarkedPostsQuery` class for this method, you make your code more organized and easier to look after. This class will only deal with this specific query, making it easier to understand, test, and update without affecting other parts of your app.

Here's how you might structure the new query object class:

```ruby
class UserWithBookmarkedPostsQuery
  def call(period = :previous_week)
    bookmarked_posts = Post.public_send(period)
                            .where.associated(:bookmarks)
                            .select(:user_id).distinct
    User.with(bookmarked_posts:).joins(:bookmarked_posts)
  end
end
```

Usage of this new query object would be straightforward and centralized:

```ruby
UserWithBookmarkedPostsQuery.new.call
```

This change makes the model simpler. It also makes the query logic better because it can be used more easily again in other parts of the program.

## Reusable Query Objects

Using reusable query objects and `Arel` can really smooth out how your application talks to the database. This is especially true when you have complex or big queries that go across models. This makes managing database tasks easier and more efficient.

###  A Practical Application Example

Let's say we've added a new feature to the `Post` model that lets you tag posts. These tags are stored as a list in the database. We've also added this tagging feature to the `Bookmark` model. Both models need to find items based on these tags.

Since both models do the same thing with tags, it makes sense to create one tool that both can use. This tool would handle the tag searches. This avoids doing the same work twice and makes everything easier to manage.

### Example: TaggedQuery Class

We created a `TaggedQuery` class that can be applied to any model, thus encapsulating the tag-related query logic:

```ruby
class ApplicationQuery
  private attr_reader :relation
  def initialize(relation) = @relation = relation
  def resolve(...) = relation
end

class TaggedQuery < ApplicationQuery
  def resolve(tag)
    relation.where("EXISTS (SELECT 1 FROM json_each(tags) WHERE value = ?)", tag)
  end
end
```

This query object is not directly attached to any model but can be invoked like so:

```ruby
# For posts
TaggedQuery.new(Post.all).resolve("rails")
# For bookmarks
TaggedQuery.new(user.bookmarks).resolve("ruby")
```

### Arel Integration for Flexibility

When `SQL` queries become complex, raw string manipulation becomes risky and hard to manage. This is where `Arel`, a part of the `Active Record` library, becomes invaluable. `Arel` abstracts `SQL` into a relational algebra that is safer and more robust to use.

<!-- markdownlint-capture -->
<!-- markdownlint-disable -->

> Check out `Arel` doc page https://www.rubydoc.info/docs/rails/7.0.4.3/Arel
{: .prompt-info }

<!-- markdownlint-restore -->

For example, our `TaggedQuery` class can be rewritten using `Arel` to handle tags more efficiently and securely:

```ruby
class TaggedQuery < ApplicationQuery
  def resolve(tag)
    subquery = tags.project(1).where(tags[:value].eq(tag))
    relation.where(subquery.exists)
  end

  private

  def tags
    @tags ||= Arel::Nodes::NamedFunction.new("json_each", [arel_table[:tags]]).then do
      name = Arel.sql(_1.to_sql)
      Arel::Table.new(name, as: :json_tags)
    end
  end

  def arel_table = self.class.query_model.arel_table
end
```

### Organizing Query Objects

Where should we put these query tools? The best place is in their own special folder in the application, away from the models. This helps keep the code neat and tidy. It also keeps the complex database tasks separate from the simple model definitions. This follows the rule that each part of the code should do just one thing.

## Conclusion

By using method chaining and scopes in models, we wrap up common queries. This makes them easy to use again and easy to change.

Also, moving specific query details into separate objects makes models simpler and puts complex query tasks in one place.

This way of organizing code cuts down on repeat tasks and leads to a neater, more structured codebase.

<!-- markdownlint-capture -->
<!-- markdownlint-disable -->

> Learn more about this topic from book: [Layered Design for Ruby on Rails Applications](https://www.packtpub.com/product/layered-design-for-ruby-on-rails-applications/9781801813785)
{: .prompt-info }

<!-- markdownlint-restore -->
